---
title: Essay 1
layout: about
permalink: /essay-01.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Progressive Era;Roaring Twenties and Great Depression;Against FDR;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# The Economic Policies of Republican Presidents and Presidential Candidates over the 20th Century
## Introduction
  From the election of William McKinley in 1897 until the start of the Great Depression, the Republican Party maintained a government trifecta, controlling the White House, House, and Senate except only in the years around and during Woodrow Wilson’s presidency. As evidenced by the views of Republican presidents and candidates, there were certain economic policies that predominated the Republican Party in this time, including protectionism through high tariff rates, reciprocity in trade with other nations, lowering income taxes, and relieving the national debt. Additionally, before its abandonment, Republicans supported the gold standard for the American dollar, and more progressive Republicans often supported the practice of “trust-busting” started by Teddy Roosevelt. During the Great Depression, Republican economic policies shifted more toward simply opposing the policies of Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR) and his New Deal, as evidenced by the views of his opponents in his runs for reelection.

## The Progressive Era
  William McKinley shared most of his economic views with those of the Republican Party. He denounced the Democratic stance on tariffs, claiming that it would “bring deficiency to our revenues and destruction to our industry” if implemented.[^1] McKinley also shared his party’s opposition to bimetallism, calling efforts to incorporate silver into the monetary system alongside gold an assault on “the currency and credit of the government”.[^1] He signed the Gold Standard Act, which established a *de jure* gold standard for the American dollar.[^2] The nation’s infrastructural development over previous decades influenced McKinley’s view on trade. He saw how “swift ships and swift trains” had connected the world better than ever before, taking it as evidence that “the period of exclusiveness” was over.[^3] McKinley believed competition was the source of the United States’ “unexampled prosperity”[^3] and so he supported reciprocity treaties like the ones established under the 1890 Tariff Act.[^4] However, McKinley still prioritized American goods, advising purchasing only where it would “enlarge our sales and productions” but selling “everywhere we can”.[^3] Evidently, the McKinley administration followed this policy closely, as there was “an excess of exports over imports” totaling nearly one and half billion dollars during his time in office.[^5] McKinley was reelected in 1900 but was assassinated less than a year later by an anarchist.

  Upon McKinley’s death, Vice President Teddy Roosevelt became the new President. As a Republican, Teddy’s economic views were more progressive than his party’s, but he generally aligned with the platform. He continued the practice of reciprocity, which he called “the handmaiden of protection”,[^6] and he encouraged reciprocal commercial treaties, like the one with Cuba.[^7] Teddy agreed with the protective tariff in principle but noticed how the issue divided the party, so he remained neutral, stating that the current tariff law “could not with wisdom be changed”.[^8] He also supported an income tax but claimed that an inheritance tax would be “a far better method of taxation”.[^8] Teddy was a supporter of capitalism, attributing the United States’ recent development to the “captains of industry”, but he warned of the dangers of “over-capitalization”.[^6] He was dissatisfied with the “present conditions of business”[^9] and wished to regulate “great industrial combinations”.[^6] He proclaimed his goal in doing so to be securing prosperity for small businesses while ensuring the failure of “the big man who is dishonest”.[^9] The method by which he regulated what he deemed to be “bad trusts” became known as “trust-busting”, and he prosecuted many companies under the Sherman Anti-Trust Law. However, Teddy still believed that big business was necessary and took no issue with “innocent and proper” corporations as long as they did not “restrict interstate commerce”.[^10]

  As promised, Teddy did not seek a third term and chose William Howard Taft as his successor. Thanks to Teddy’s support, Taft became the Republican candidate and was soon elected President. In line with his party’s platform, Taft supported the Dingley Tariff but called for revisions to it.[^11] He opposed the “standpatter” Republicans who supported increasing tariff rates, claiming that excessive rates would create “temptation… to form monopolies”.[^12] Taft encouraged the practice of reciprocity, especially toward Canada, believing any agreement would be “mutually advantageous” and bring prosperity.[^13] The practice of trust-busting also continued under Taft, with 99 Sherman Anti-Trust prosecutions occurring during the Taft administration’s four years.[^14] Taft supported an income tax but knew that “the decision of the Supreme Court” meant that any future bill establishing a tax would be struck down.[^15] Regardless, he believed that “a great majority” of the country supported a federal income tax and so proposed an amendment to the Constitution.[^15] Taft was successful and the Sixteenth Amendment was ratified, which implemented a federal income tax nationwide. Teddy notably viewed Taft’s policies and actions as too conservative, and after Taft received the Republican nomination again in 1912, he left the party to form his own Progressive Party.


{% include feature/image.html filename="PartyPlatforms2.png" alt="frequency of terms in Republican Party Platforms" caption="Frequency of labor*, industry*, gold*, economy*" width="100" %}


  The Republican schism that resulted from Teddy's departure ensured the Democratic government trifecta that came from the 1912 elections. Woodrow Wilson became the President, and his party gained a majority in the Senate, having already gained control of the House after the 1910 elections. When running for reelection in 1916, Wilson’s Republican opponent was Charles Evans Hughes, an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. Most of Hughes’ economic views were typical of the Republican Party at the time. He anticipated economic consequences that would come with the end of World War I and he advocated for “a fair and wine readjustment of the tariff” in preparation.[^16] Hughes notably opposed the Sixteenth Amendment because of the power it granted the federal government, but he supported an income tax in principle.[^17] He also opposed the Adamson Act which established the eight-hour workday, seeing it as political opportunism, and accused Wilson of “knuckling under to railroad workers”.[^18] Hughes lost the election to Wilson, though he later became Secretary of State under Harding and Coolidge and was nominated to the Supreme Court by Hoover.

## The Roaring Twenties and the Great Depression
  Warren Harding was elected President amidst a post-war economic depression. Harding campaigned for a “return to normalcy” after World War I, believing that the United States needed “to steady down, to get squarely on its feet”.[^19] He opposed the “false economics” of the Wilson administration[^19] and repurposed Wilson’s “America First” slogan toward solving domestic economic issues. His economic views generally aligned with the Republican Party, but he focused especially on the issues of tariffs and income tax during his presidency. As President, he wished to immediately restrict national expenditures to “within the limits of our national income” but also asked to “lift the burdens of war taxation” off Americans.[^20] He sought an internal readjustment of the tax system that would repeal any “unproductive” taxes and streamline the tax code. The Revenue Act of 1921 accomplished this somewhat, repealing the excess profits tax and reducing the top marginal rate from 73 percent to 58.[^21] Harding also supported increasing tariffs because of the negative effect he felt that recent importing had on American agriculture. He felt that “imports should pay their fair share” and that the tariff passed under Wilson offered “the privileges of the American market to the foreign producer” too easily.[^20]

  Harding died of cardiac arrest while in office, and upon his untimely death, Vice President Calvin Coolidge became the new President. Coming into the office, Coolidge’s economic views seemed aligned with his predecessor’s. However, he directly opposed income tax, claiming that the “power to tax is the power to destroy”.[^22] He continued Harding’s efforts to reduce war taxes and urged Congress to pass legislation doing so.[^23] Multiple Revenue Acts were passed, each of which reformed and reduced various taxes. Coolidge also wished to retire the national debt and he steadily reduced federal expenditures while in office, which in turn reduced the total debt from nearly $24 billion in 1921 to just over $21 billion in 1924.[^22] Coolidge notably did not think tariff reforms were necessary. He claimed that the tariff law’s “constant revision… is disturbing and harmful” and that in its current state it has brought about prosperity.[^23] Clearly, Coolidge had a *laissez-faire* ideology and his ideas on taxation and government spending are still prominent in the Republican Party today.

  Coolidge announced he would not run for reelection and Herbert Hoover became the next President. He praised the economic and infrastructural progress of the Coolidge administration and declared that the “purpose of our economic thought” should be to abolish poverty.[^24] To do so, Hoover first focused on the ongoing farm crisis. He urged Congress to pass the Agricultural Marketing Act so that “the building of a sound agricultural system” could begin.[^25] However, less than a year into his presidency, the American stock market crashed, starting the Great Depression. In the early days of the Depression, Hoover gave many messages regarding the economic crisis. In the weeks following the initial Black Thursday crash, he assured that business was “on a sound and prosperous basis”[^26] and that the “stock market phenomenon” was isolated.[^27] To Hoover, it was “a psychological situation” and so the solution was not government intervention but rather simply giving “confidence to the public that the business fabric” was fixing itself.[^28] He refused to drop the gold standard, dismissing anything else as “collectivism”,[^29] and signed the Tariff Act of 1930, which increased tariffs further.[^30] The Great Depression continued despite Hoover’s efforts, or lack thereof, and his failure to end the crisis ultimately led to FDR winning the presidency in the 1932 election. Through his New Deal, FDR implemented many economic programs to help the United States recover from the Great Depression, but many Republicans opposed the New Deal on the grounds of anti-collectivism.[^31] This opposition is clearly demonstrated in the campaigns of Republicans who ran against FDR during his time in office.
  
## Running Against FDR


{% include feature/image.html filename="PartyPlatforms.png" alt="term frequency in Republican Party Platforms" caption="Frequency of debt*, new deal*, tariff*, tax*" width="100" %}


  FDR’s Republican opponent in his first run for reelection was Alf Landon, the governor of Kansas. In accepting the Republican nomination, Landon pledged “complete adherence” to the party platform.[^32] He claimed that “too frequently recovery has been hindered… by political considerations”.[^32] Despite the powers granted to the FDR administration, Landon did not see any progress made toward ending the depression. He criticized the “arbitrary and uncertain” policy of the FDR administration and called for an end to “excessive expenditures and crippling taxation”.[^32] Landon also opposed the Social Security Act, denouncing it as “a fraud on the workingman”.[^33] He believed that excessive income taxes “slow down the advance of wages” and increase unemployment.[^33] To Landon, FDR’s New Deal opposed the “basic ideals of the American system”.[^34] Ultimately, he was unsuccessful in his campaign and FDR remained in power.

  In the months leading up to the 1940 election, isolationist Thomas Dewey was the front-runner among many others contending for the Republican nomination. However, the ongoing German offensive in Europe was quick to change that. A dark horse candidate emerged, and that was Wendell Willkie, a former Democrat who supported FDR in 1932,[^35] who became popular through his calls for a publicized foreign policy and “extension of every aid short of war” to Europe.[^36] Willkie was a businessman who had never held public office and a self-proclaimed liberal. He opposed FDR’s New Deal, claiming that FDR had “distorted” liberalism.[^37] He saw FDR as acting against the interests of business and called for a new “business-like administration” to bring about prosperity.[^38] While he did earn six million more votes than Landon in 1936, Willkie still lost the election, and FDR remained President.

  While Dewey was unsuccessful in securing the Republican nomination in 1940, he was successful in 1944. Like Willkie before him, most of Dewey’s campaign was in direct opposition to the policies of FDR. He denounced FDR as a “one-man government”, and while he acknowledged that “in its young days the FDR administration did some good things”, he felt that time had certainly passed.[^39] Dewey ended up losing the election by over three million votes, but he would run for president again in 1948 against FDR’s successor, Harry Truman.

## Conclusion
  Clearly, the Republican Party had consistent economic policies over the first half of the 20th century. High tariffs, reciprocity in trade, lower taxes, and debt relief were the solutions to the nation’s problems according to Republican presidents and candidates. However, with FDR and his New Deal, specific economic policies took a backseat as the Republican Party stood in direct opposition to the FDR administration.

## Notes
[^1]: Willian McKinley, "Speech Accepting the Republican Nomination," transcript of speech, July 12, 1900, (https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/july-12-1900-speech-accepting-republican-nomination).
[^2]: Lewis L. Gould *The Presidency of William McKinley* (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1980).
[^3]: William McKinley, "Speech in Buffalo, New York," transcript of speech, Sept. 5, 1901, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/september-5-1901-speech-buffalo-new-york.
[^4]: New York Times, "Reciprocity Treaties With Other Countries," *New York Times*, Nov. 24, 1901, https://www.nytimes.com/1901/11/24/archives/reciprocity-treaties-with-other-countries-official-data-covering.html.
[^5]: Republican Party, "Republican Party Platform of 1900," June 19, 1900, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/republican-party-platform-1900.
[^6]: Theodore Roosevelt, "First State of the Union Address," transcript of address to Congress, Dec. 3, 1901, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/first-annual-message-16.
[^7]: Theodore Roosevelt, "Message Regarding US-Cuban Commercial Convention," transcript of address to Congress, Nov. 10, 1903, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/november-10-1903-message-regarding-us-cuban-commercial.
[^8]: Theodore Roosevelt, "Seventh State of the Union Address," transcript of address to Congress, Dec. 3, 1907, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/seventh-annual-message-4.
[^9]: Theodore Roosevelt, "The Farmer and the Businessman," transcript of speech, Aug., 1912, https://www.theodoreroosevelt.org/content.aspx?page_id=22&club_id=991271&module_id=338373.
[^10]: Theodore Roosevelt, "Message Regarding Labor Legislation," transcript of address to Congress, March 25, 1908, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/march-25-1908-message-regarding-labor-legislation.
[^11]: Paolo Enrico Coletta, *The Presidency of William Howard Taft* (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1973).
[^12]: William Howard Taft, "Address on the Tariff Law of 1909," transcript of speech, Nov. 17, 1909, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/november-17-1909-address-tariff-law-1909.
[^13]: William Howard Taft, "Special Message on Canadian Reciprocity," transcript of address to Congress, Jan. 26, 1911, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/january-26-1911-special-message-canadian-reciprocity.
[^14]: Peri E. Arnold, "William Taft: Domestic Affairs," *Miller Center*, https://millercenter.org/president/taft/domestic-affairs.
[^15]: William Howard Taft, "Message Regarding Income Tax," transcript of address to Congress, June 16, 1909, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/june-16-1909-message-regarding-income-tax.
[^16]: Charles Evans Hughes, "Telegram Accept the Republican Nomination for President," transcript of telegram, June 10, 1916, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/telegram-accepting-the-republican-nomination-for-president.
[^17]: Arthur A. Ekirch, "The Sixteenth Amendment: The Historical Background," *Cato Journal* vol. 1, no. 1 (Spring 1981): 161-182, https://web.archive.org/web/20120114114404/http://www.cato.org/pubs/journal/cj1n1/cj1n1-9.pdf.
[^18]: James A. Henretta, "Charles Evans Hughes and the Strange Death of Liberal America," *Law and History Review* vol. 24, no. 1 (Spring 2006): 115-171, https://www.jstor.org/stable/27641353?seq=30#metadata_info_tab_contents.
[^19]: Warren G. Harding, "Readjustment," transcript of speech, May 14, 1920, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/may-14-1920-readjustment.
[^20]: Warren G. Harding, "Address to a Joint Session of Congress on Urgent National Problems," transcript of address to Congress, April 12, 1921, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-joint-session-congress-urgent-national-problems.
[^21]: Roy G. Blakey, "The Revenue Act of 1921," *The American Economic Review* vol. 12, no. 1 (March 1922): 75-108, https://www.jstor.org/stable/1801769?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents.
[^22]: Calvin Coolidge, "Address at the Seventh Regular Meeting of the Business Organization of the Government," transcript of speech, June 30, 1924, https://coolidgefoundation.org/resources/address-at-the-seventh-regular-meeting-of-the-business-organization-of-the-government/.
[^23]: Calvin Coolidge, "First State of the Union Address," transcript of address to Congress, Dec. 6, 1923, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/node/206712.
[^24]: Herbert Hoover, "Inaugural Address," transcript of speech, March 4, 1929, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/march-4-1929-inaugural-address.
[^25]: Herbert Hoover, "Message Regarding the Farm Bill," transcript of speech, June 11, 1929, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/june-11-1929-message-regarding-farm-bill.
[^26]: Herbert Hoover, "Message Regarding 'Black Thursday'," transcript of speech, Oct. 25, 1929, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/october-25-1929-message-regarding-black-thursday.
[^27]: Herbert Hoover, "Message on the Economy," transcript of speech, Nov. 5, 1929, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/november-5-1929-message-economy.
[^28]: Herbert Hoover, "Statement on the Economy," transcript of speech, Nov. 19, 1929, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/november-19-1929-statement-economy.
[^29]: Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temen, "The Gold Standard and the Great Depression," *Contemporary European History* vol. 9, no. 2 (July 2000): 183-207, https://www.jstor.org/stable/20081742?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents.
[^30]: Edward S. Kaplan, "The Fordney-McCumber Tariff of 1922," *EH.net Encyclopedia*, https://eh.net/encyclopedia/the-fordney-mccumber-tariff-of-1922/.
[^31]: George H. Nash, "The Republican Right From Taft to Reagan," *Reviews in American History* vol. 12, no. 2, (June 1984): 261-265, https://www.jstor.org/stable/2702450?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents.
[^32]: Alf Landon, "Address Accepting the Republican Presidential Nomination in Topeka, Kansas," transcript of speech, July 23, 1936, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-accepting-the-republican-presidential-nomination-topeka-kansas.
[^33]: Alf Landon, "I Will Not Promise the Moon," transcript of speech, Oct. 15, 1936, http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/8128/.
[^34]: Time, "Republicans: Going Places," *Time*, Oct. 26, 1936, http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,788571-1,00.html.
[^35]: Steve Neal, *Dark Horse: A Biography of Wendell Willkie*, (New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc, 1984).
[^36]: Jerold David Gritz, "A historical analysis of the nomination of Wendell Lewis Willkie for the presidency of the United States of America," (University of the Pacific, 1967), https://scholarlycommons.pacific.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2626&context=uop_etds.
[^37]: Wendell Willkie, "Address Accepting the Presidential Nomination in Elwood, Indiana," transcript of speech, Aug. 17, 1940, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-accepting-the-presidential-nomination-elwood-indiana.
[^38]: Time, "U.S. At War: We, The People," *Time*, Oct. 16, 1944, http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,885741,00.html.
[^39]: Thomas Dewey, "Address Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the Republican National Convention in Chicago, Illinois," transcript of speech, June 28, 1944. https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-accepting-the-presidential-nomination-the-republican-national-convention-chicago-1.
